[Kernel] API user guide (#1927)
delta-io/delta: kernel/USER_GUIDE.md

```
import io.delta.kernel.*;
import io.delta.kernel.defaults.*';
import org.apache.hadoop.conf.Configuration;

String myTablePath = <my-table-path> ;
Configuration hadoopConf = new Configuration()
TableClient myTableClient = DefaultTableClient.create(hadoopConf);
Table myTable = Table.forPath(myTablePath);
```

Note the default <code>[TableClient](https://delta-io.github.io/delta/snapshot/kernel-api/java/api//io/delta/kernel/client/TableClient.html)</code> we are creating to bootstrap the <code>myTable</code> object. This object allows you to plugin your own libraries for computationally intensive operations like Parquet file reading, JSON parsing, etc. You can ignore it for now. We will discuss more about this later when we will discuss how to build more complex connectors for distributed processing engines. 

From this `myTable` object you can create a <code>[Snapshot](https://delta-io.github.io/delta/snapshot/kernel-api/java/api//io/delta/kernel/Snapshot.html)</code> object which represents the consistent state (aka a snapshot consistency) in a specific version of the table.  

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```java
```

### Step 1: Set up Delta Kernel in your connector project

In the Delta Kernel project, there are multiple dependencies you can choose to depend on.

1. Delta Kernel core APIs - This is a must-have dependency, which contains all the main APIs like Table, Snapshot and Scan that you will use to access the metadata and data of the Delta table. This has very few dependencies reducing the chance of conflicts with any dependencies in your connector and engine. This also provides the <code>[TableClient](https://delta-io.github.io/delta/snapshot/kernel-api/java/api//io/delta/kernel/client/TableClient.html)</code> interface which allows you to plug in your implementations of computationally-expensive operations, but it does not provide any implementation of this interface. 
2. Delta Kernel default <code>[TableClient](https://delta-io.github.io/delta/snapshot/kernel-api/java/api//index.html)</code> - This has a default implementation called [DefaultTableClient](https://delta-io.github.io/delta/snapshot/kernel-api/java/api//index.html) and additional dependencies. If you wish to reuse all or parts of this implementation, then you can optionally depend on this. 

#### Set up Java projects

> As discussed above, you can one or both of the artifacts as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As discussed above, you can import one or both of the artifacts as follows:
```

* Credentials and permissions: Connector must populate its FileSystemClient with necessary configurations and credentials for the client to retrieve the necessary data from the storage system. For example, an implementation based on Hadoop's FileSystem abstractions can be passed S3 credentials via the Hadoop configurations.
* Decryption: If file system objects are encrypted, then the implementation must decrypt the data before returning the data.

#### Implement [ParquetReader](https://delta-io.github.io/delta/snapshot/kernel-api/java/api//io/delta/kernel/client/ParquetHandler.html)

As the name suggests, this interface contains everything related to reading Parquet files. It has been designed such that a connector can plug in a wide variety of implementations, from a simple single-threaded reader, to a very advanced multi-threaded reader with pre-fetching and advanced connector-specific expression pushdown. Let's explore the methods to implement, and the guarantees associated with them. 

##### Method contextualizeFileReads() 

> This method associates the information of a to-be-read file to a connector-specific context object, called `FileReadContext`. Implementations can use this method to inject connector-specific information to optimize the file read. For example, if you want split reading a 256 MB Parquet file (say, `file1.parquet`) into 2 chunks of size 128 MB, then you can create two successive entries `fileReadContext1(file1.parquet)` and `fileReadContext1(file1.parquet)` where the context objects created by this method contains the byte ranges to read. This byte ranges will be used by the next method to do the necessary partial reads.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This method associates the information of a to-be-read file to a connector-specific context object, called `FileReadContext`. Implementations can use this method to inject connector-specific information to optimize the file read. For example, if you want split reading a 256 MB Parquet file (say, `file1.parquet`) into 2 chunks of size 128 MB, then you can create two successive entries `fileReadContext1(file1.parquet)` and `fileReadContext2(file1.parquet)` where the context objects created by this method contains the byte ranges to read. This byte ranges will be used by the next method to do the necessary partial reads.
```

> **Requirements and guarantees: **Any implementation must adhere to the following guarantees.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Requirements and guarantees: **

Any implementation must adhere to the following guarantees.
```
(more below)

* The output iterator must maintain the same ordering as the input iterator. For example, if file1 is before file2 in the input iterator, then all the contexts associated with file1 must be before those of file2 in the output iterator.

##### Method readParquetFiles() 

> This method takes as input information as `FileReadContext`s and returns the data in a series of columnar batches. The columns to be read from the Parquet file are defined by the physical schema, and the return batches must match that schema. To implement this method, you may have to first implement your own `<code>[ColumnarBatch](https://delta-io.github.io/delta/snapshot/kernel-api/java/api//io/delta/kernel/data/ColumnarBatch.html)`</code> and `<code>[ColumnVector](https://delta-io.github.io/delta/snapshot/kernel-api/java/api//io/delta/kernel/data/ColumnVector.html)`</code> which is used to represent the in-memory data generated from the Parquet files.

Reviewer: This doesn't render correctly:
![image](https://github.com/delta-io/delta/assets/79601771/e4197081-22d1-4ad1-8928-1a5dce1e1464)

I'm not sure what the `<code>` tags are trying to do? Maybe this would work better?
```suggestion
This method takes as input information as `FileReadContext`s and returns the data in a series of columnar batches. The columns to be read from the Parquet file are defined by the physical schema, and the return batches must match that schema. To implement this method, you may have to first implement your own [`ColumnarBatch`](https://delta-io.github.io/delta/snapshot/kernel-api/java/api//io/delta/kernel/data/ColumnarBatch.html) and [`ColumnVector`](https://delta-io.github.io/delta/snapshot/kernel-api/java/api//io/delta/kernel/data/ColumnVector.html) which is used to represent the in-memory data generated from the Parquet files.
```
(tho I'm not sure we even need the link to render as code? seems like just a link is enough)

When identifying the columns to read, note that there are multiple types of columns in the physical schema (represented as a StructType). 

* Data columns: Columns that are expected to be read from the Parquet file. Based on the ``StructField`` object defining the column, there are two cases of mapping the column description to the right column in the file. 
    * If the optional ``StructField.fieldId`` is defined, then read the column in the Parquet file which has the same field id.
    * Otherwise, read the column in the Parquet file that matches the same name.
* Metadata columns: These are special columns that must be populated using metadata about the Parquet file. To understand how to populate such a column, first match the column name against the set of standard metadata column name constants. For example, 

>     * ``StructField`.`ROW_INDEX_COLUMN_NAME``, then you have to a generate column vector populated with the actual index of each row in the Parquet file (that is, not indexed by the possibly subset of rows return after Parquet data skipping). See the docs for more details.

Reviewer: This didn't render correctly:
![image](https://github.com/delta-io/delta/assets/79601771/0080340c-a4fb-401d-ba4e-b964ddcf79fa)
```suggestion
    * `` `StructField`.`ROW_INDEX_COLUMN_NAME` ``, then you have to a generate column vector populated with the actual index of each row in the Parquet file (that is, not indexed by the possibly subset of rows return after Parquet data skipping). See the docs for more details.
```

It apparently needs padding spaces to separate the "boundary" backticks from the "internal" ones that should render, ie `` `StructField`.`ROW_INDEX_COLUMN_NAME` ``. But anyway shouldn't those be single quotes rather than backticks? `'StructField'.'ROW_INDEX_COLUMN_NAME'`

**Requirements and guarantees: **Any implementation must adhere to the following guarantees.

* The schema of the returned ColumnarBatches must match the physical schema. 
    * If a data column is not found and the ``StructField.isNullable = true``, then return a ColumnVector of nulls. Throw error if it is not nullable.
* The output iterator must maintain ordering as the input iterator. That is, if file1 is before file2 in the input iterator, then columnar batches of file1 must be before those of file2 in the output iterator.

**Performance suggestions:**

* The representation of data as `ColumnVectors` and `ColumnarBatches` can have a significant impact on the query performance and it's best to read the Parquet file data directly into vectors and batches of the engine-native format to avoid potentially costly in-memory data format conversion. This is further discussed later.

#### Implement ExpressionHandler

> The `[ExpressionHandler](https://vkorukanti.github.io/delta-kernel2/index.html?io/delta/kernel/types/StructType.html)` interface has all the methods needed for handling expressions that may be applied on columnar data. 

Reviewer: Another broken link (and also it points to the wrong repo??)

##### Method getEvaluator() 

> [This method](https://vkorukanti.github.io/delta-kernel2/io/delta/kernel/client/ExpressionHandler.html#getEvaluator-io.delta.kernel.types.StructType-io.delta.kernel.expressions.Expression-) generates a function (called ExpressionEvaluator) that can evaluate an expression on a batch of row data to produce a result of a single column vector. To generate this function, the ``getEvaluator`()` method takes as input the expression and the schema of the ``ColumnarBatches`` of data on which the expressions will be applied.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[This method](https://vkorukanti.github.io/delta-kernel2/io/delta/kernel/client/ExpressionHandler.html#getEvaluator-io.delta.kernel.types.StructType-io.delta.kernel.expressions.Expression-) generates a function (called ExpressionEvaluator) that can evaluate an expression on a batch of row data to produce a result of a single column vector. To generate this function, the `getEvaluator()` method takes as input the expression and the schema of the `ColumnarBatches` of data on which the expressions will be applied.
```

**Requirements and guarantees: **Any implementation must adhere to the following guarantees.

> * Implementation must handle all possible variations of expressions. If they implementation encounters an expression type that it does not know how to handle, then it must throw a standard exception.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Implementation must handle all possible variations of expressions. If the implementation encounters an expression type that it does not know how to handle, then it must throw a specific language-dependent exception:
```

    * Java: [NotSupportedException](https://docs.oracle.com/javaee/7/api/javax/resource/NotSupportedException.html) 

> * The ColumnarBatches on which the generated ExpressionEvaluator is going to be used are guaranteed to have the schema provided during generation. Hence, it is safe to bind the expression evaluation logic to column ordinals instead of column names, thus making the actual evaluation faster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The `ColumnarBatch`es on which the generated `ExpressionEvaluator` is going to be used are guaranteed to have the schema provided during generation. Hence, it is safe to bind the expression evaluation logic to column ordinals instead of column names, thus making the actual evaluation faster.
```

**Requirements and guarantees: **Any implementation must adhere to the following guarantees.

* The output iterator must maintain the same ordering as the input iterator. For example, if file1 is before file2 in the input iterator, then all the contexts associated with file1 must be before those of file2 in the output iterator.

##### Method readJsonFiles() 

This method takes as input information as `FileReadContext`s and returns the data in a series of columnar batches. The columns to be read from the JSON file are defined by the physical schema, and the return batches must match that schema. To implement this method, you may have to first implement your own `<code>[ColumnarBatch](https://delta-io.github.io/delta/snapshot/kernel-api/java/api//io/delta/kernel/data/ColumnarBatch.html)`</code> and `<code>[ColumnVector](https://delta-io.github.io/delta/snapshot/kernel-api/java/api//io/delta/kernel/data/ColumnVector.html)`</code> which is used to represent the in-memory data generated from the JSON files.

> When identifying the columns to read, note that there are multiple types of columns in the physical schema (represented as a StructType). 

Reviewer: `StructType` needs link and/or preformat?
(several more)

#### Method parseJson

This method allows parsing a `ColumnVector` of JSON string into the output format specified by the `outputSchema`. If a given column column `outputSchema` is not found, then a null value is returned.

#### Implement ColumnarBatch and ColumnVector 

> ColumnarBatch and ColumnVector two interfaces represent the data read into memory from files. This representation can have a significant impact on query performance. Each engine likely has a native representation of in-memory data with which it applies data transformations operations. For example, in Spark, the row data is internally represented as `UnsafeRow` for efficient processing. So it's best to read the Parquet file data directly into vectors and batches of the native format to avoid potentially costly in-memory data format conversions. So the recommended approach is to build wrapper classes that extend the two interfaces but internally use engine-native classes to store the data. When the connector has to forward the columnar batches received from the kernel to the engine, it has to be smart enough to skip converting vectors and batches that are already in the engine-native format. This will be discussed in more detail later. 

Reviewer: One sentence per line is easier to edit and diff over time...
```suggestion
`ColumnarBatch` and `ColumnVector` two interfaces represent the data read into memory from files. 
This representation can have a significant impact on query performance. 
Each engine likely has a native representation of in-memory data with which it applies data transformations operations. 
For example, in Spark, the row data is internally represented as `UnsafeRow` for efficient processing. 
So it's best to read the Parquet file data directly into vectors and batches of the native format to avoid potentially costly in-memory data format conversions. 
The recommended approach is to build wrapper classes that extend the two interfaces but internally use engine-native classes to store the data. 
When the connector has to forward the columnar batches received from the kernel to the engine, it has to be smart enough to skip converting vectors and batches that are already in the engine-native format. 
This will be discussed in more detail later. 
```

The first step is to resolve the consistent snapshot and the schema associated with it. This is often required by the connector / engine to resolve and validate the logical plan of the scan query (if the concept of logical plan exists in your engine). To achieve this, the connector has to do the following.

* Resolve the table path from the query: If the path is directly available, then this is easy. Else if it is a query based on a catalog table (for example, a Delta table defined in Hive Metastore), then the connector has to resolve the table location / path from the catalog.
* Initialize the TableClient object: Create a new instance of the TableClient that you have chosen in [Step 2](#bookmark=id.26in1rg). 
* Initialize the Kernel objects and get the schema: Assuming the query is on the latest available version/snapshot of the table, you can get the table schema as follows:

```
import io.delta.kernel.*;
import io.delta.kernel.defaults.*';

TableClient myTableClient = new MyTableClient();
Table myTable = Table.forPath(myTablePath);
Snapshot mySnapshot = myTable.getLatestSnapshot(myTableClient);
StructType mySchema = mySnapshot.getSchema(myTableClient);
```

> If you want to query a specific version of the table (that is, not the schema), then you can get the required snapshot as ``myTable.getSnapshot(version)``.

Reviewer: I don't quite understand this sentence? If the table's schema can change over time, it seems like we should always get the table's schema as-of whatever specific version we want to query?

#### Step 3.2: Resolve files to scan

Next, we need to build a Scan object using the more information from the query. Here we are going to assume that the connector/engine has been able extract the following details from the query (say, after the optimizing the logical plan):

* Read schema: The columns in the table that query needs to read. This may be the full set of columns or a subset of columns.
* Query filters: The filters on partitions or data columns that can be used skip reading table data.

To provide these information to Kernel, you have to do the following:

> * Convert the engine-specific schema and filter expressions to Kernel schema and expressions: For schema, you have to create a StructType object. For the filters, you have to create an Expression object using all the available subclasses of Expression. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Convert the engine-specific schema and filter expressions to Kernel schema and expressions: For schema, you have to create a `StructType` object. For the filters, you have to create an `Expression` object using the available subclasses of `Expression`. 
```

> * Build the scan with the converted information: Build the scan as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Build the scan with the converted information:
```

```
import io.delta.kernel.expressions.*;
import io.delta.kernel.types.*;

StructType readSchema = ... ;  // convert engine schema
Expression filterExpr = ... ;  // convert engine filter expression

> Scan myScan = mySnapshot.buildScan(tableClient)
> 	.applyFilter(filterExpr)
>        .applyReadSchema(readSchema)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Scan myScan = mySnapshot.buildScan(tableClient)
    .applyFilter(filterExpr)
    .applyReadSchema(readSchema)
```
(a stray tab slipped in, plus a weird indent count)

> .build()

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    .build()
```

```

* Resolve the information required to file reads: The generated Scan object has two sets of information. 

>     * Scan files: ``myScan.getScanFiles()`` returns an iterator of ``ColumnarBatches`` . Each batch in the iterator contains rows and each row has information about a single file that has been selected based on the query filter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * Scan files: ``myScan.getScanFiles()`` returns an iterator of ``ColumnarBatch``es. Each batch in the iterator contains rows and each row has information about a single file that has been selected based on the query filter.
```

#### Step 3.3: Distribute the file information to the workers

If you are building a connector for a distributed engine like Spark/Presto/Trino/Flink, then your connector has to send all the scan metadata from the query planning machine (henceforth called the driver) to task execution machines (henceforth called the workers). You will have to serialize and deserialize the scan state and scan file rows. To facilitate this, in Java, Delta Kernel provides serialization / deserialization utility methods that use simple Java serialization. 

```
import io.delta.kernel.utils.*;

// In the driver where query planning is being done
Byte[] scanStateRowBytes = RowUtils.serialize(scanStateRow);
Byte[] scanFileRowBytes = RowUtils.serialize(scanFileRow);

// Send these over to the worker

// In the worker when data will be read, after rowBytes have been sent over
Row scanStateRow = RowUtils.deserialize(scanStateRowBytes)
Row scanFileRow = RowUtils.deserialize(scanFileRowBytes)
```

> If you want to use your own serializer / deserializer, then you must take care to serialize / deserialize the row data in the correct way such that it encodes any number and types of columns that may be present in the row. This is [discussed in more detail later](#bookmark=id.2p2csry). Furthermore, a connector may want to split the reading of a single file to multiple tasks to be executed 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want to use your own serializer / deserializer, then you must take care to serialize/deserialize the row data in the correct way such that it encodes any number and types of columns that may be present in the row. 
This is [discussed in more detail later](#bookmark=id.2p2csry). 
Furthermore, a connector may want to split the reading of a single file to multiple tasks to be executed in parallel
```

Reviewer: Also, is that bookmark id valid/portable?

**Requirements and guarantees: **Here are the details you need to ensure when distributing the scan file rows among tasks.

> * It is strongly recommended that when 

Reviewer: ... what?
